README.md, before:

# Smart Search Plugin for Docusaurus

A sophisticated search plugin for Docusaurus 2.x that provides powerful search capabilities with an elegant, accessible interface. This plugin seamlessly integrates with your Docusaurus documentation, offering real-time search functionality while respecting your site's theme and configuration.

> Support for Docusaurus 3.x is a work in progress.  Stay tuned!

## Key features

- 🚀 **High-Performance Search**: Client-side search powered by Lunr.js for instant results
- 🎨 **Elegant UI**: Modern interface built with Ant Design, featuring an expandable search bar
- 🌓 **Theme Integration**: Seamless support for Docusaurus light/dark modes and custom themes
- ⚡️ **Real-time Search**: Instant search-as-you-type with highlighted results
- 📱 **Responsive Design**: Optimized for all screen sizes with a mobile-friendly interface
- 🔍 **Smart Indexing**: Efficient content indexing with file change detection and caching
- 🎯 **Rich Metadata**: Support for frontmatter fields including keywords and update tracking
- 🚫 **Content Control**: Flexible content exclusion with folder and draft support
- ♿️ **Accessibility**: Full keyboard navigation and ARIA support
- 💨 **Performance Optimized**: File caching and incremental builds for faster development

## Installation

```bash
npm install smart-search-plugin
```

```bash
yarn add smart-search-plugin
```

## Configuration

Add the plugin to your `docusaurus.config.js`:

```jsx
const path = require('path');

  staticDirectories: ['static'], // Required for search index

  plugins: [
    path.resolve(__dirname, 'node_modules/smart-search-plugin')
  ],

  presets: [
    [
      '@docusaurus/preset-classic',
      {
        docs: {
          routeBasePath: '/',  // Required
          path: 'docs', // Required for the correct linking of topics
          showLastUpdateTime: true, // Enables last update display
        },
      },
    ],
  ],

  themeConfig: {
       navbar: {
      items: [
        {
          type: 'search',
          position: 'right',
        },
      ],
    },
  },
};

```

## Document structure

### Required directory structure

```
your-docusaurus-site/
├── docs/                   # Documentation root
│   ├── intro.md           # Documentation files
│   └── advanced/
│       └── config.md
├── static/                 # Static assets directory
└── docusaurus.config.js    # Configuration file

```

### Frontmatter configuration

Your markdown files can include these frontmatter fields for enhanced search functionality:

```markdown
---
title: Document Title
description: A brief description that appears in search results
keywords: [search, docusaurus, plugin]
draft: false                # Exclude from search when true
last_update:               # Optional update tracking
  date: 2024-03-20
  author: John Doe
---

```

## Content processing

### Smart content indexing

The plugin processes your content with these features:

1. **Intelligent caching**
    - File-based caching system for faster builds
    - Automatic detection of content changes
    - Incremental rebuilding for modified files only
2. **Content normalization**
    - Consistent URL generation across platforms
    - Special handling for index files
    - Clean URL paths for improved SEO
3. **Automatic exclusions**
Content automatically excluded from search:
    - Root/welcome page (URL: '/')
    - Draft documents
    - Content in excluded folders (default: 'contributor-guide')
    - Files with `draft: true` in frontmatter

### Search index generation

The plugin creates two search index files:

- `/build/searchIndex.json`: Public search index
- `/static/searchIndex.json`: Development index

## User interface

### Search component features

The search interface provides:

- Expandable search input
- Real-time results dropdown
- Keyboard navigation support
- Result highlighting
- Last update information display
- Mobile-friendly design

### Keyboard shortcuts

- `Enter`: Navigate to first result
- `Escape`: Close search dropdown
- `Tab`: Navigate through results
- `Arrow Up/Down`: Navigate results (coming soon)

### Styling customization

Override default styles by creating a custom CSS module with these classes:

```css
.searchContainer    /* Main container */
.searchWrapper     /* Input container */
.searchIcon        /* Search icon */
.searchInput       /* Search input */
.dropdownResults   /* Results dropdown */
.resultItem        /* Individual result */
.resultTitle      /* Result title */
.resultMeta       /* Update information */

```

## Technical details

### Project architecture

```
smart-search-plugin/
├── src/
│   ├── index.js           # Plugin core
│   └── theme/
│       ├── index.js       # Theme exports
│       ├── Layout.js      # Layout integration
│       ├── Root.js        # Root component
│       └── SearchBar/
│           ├── Search.js  # Search component
│           └── styles.module.css
└── lib/                   # Compiled output

```

### Dependencies

The plugin uses these key dependencies:

- `lunr`: Search implementation
- `antd`: UI components
- `gray-matter`: Frontmatter parsing
- `@ant-design/icons`: UI icons

### Browser support

- Modern browsers (Chrome, Firefox, Safari, Edge)
- IE11 not supported

## Contributing

We welcome contributions! Please follow these steps:

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/AmazingFeature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Add some AmazingFeature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/AmazingFeature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

## License

MIT

## Credits

Built with:

- [Docusaurus](https://docusaurus.io/)
- [Ant Design](https://ant.design/)
- [Lunr.js](https://lunrjs.com/)

Commit message:

updated readme with more details on implementation

README.md, after:

# Smart Search Plugin for Docusaurus

A metadata-driven search plugin for Docusaurus 2.x that provides targeted, efficient search capabilities with an elegant, accessible interface. By leveraging metadata keywords, this plugin delivers precise search results while working seamlessly offline and in firewall-restricted environments.

👉 [Try the live demo](https://smart-search-plugin-demo.vercel.app/) | 📝 [Read the full blog post](https://www.patriciamcphee.com/blog/2024/11/08/enhancing-search-functionality/)

> Support for Docusaurus 3.x is a work in progress. Stay tuned!

## Why Smart Search?

The Smart Search Plugin reintroduces the proven concept of metadata keywords for documentation search:

- 🎯 **Targeted Results**: Only content tagged with relevant metadata appears
- 🔍 **Precise Matching**: Avoids information overload from full-text indexing
- 🏃‍♀️ **Offline Operation**: Works behind firewalls without external API dependencies
- ⚡️ **Local Testing**: Test search functionality during development
- 📱 **Modern Interface**: Responsive design with full keyboard navigation



## Installation

```bash
npm install smart-search-plugin
```

```bash
yarn add smart-search-plugin
```

## Configuration

Add the plugin to your `docusaurus.config.js`:

```jsx
const path = require('path');

  staticDirectories: ['static'], // Required for search index

  plugins: [
    path.resolve(__dirname, 'node_modules/smart-search-plugin')
  ],

  presets: [
    [
      '@docusaurus/preset-classic',
      {
        docs: {
          routeBasePath: '/',  // Required
          path: 'docs', // Required for the correct linking of topics
          showLastUpdateTime: true, // Enables last update display
        },
      },
    ],
  ],

  themeConfig: {
       navbar: {
      items: [
        {
          type: 'search',
          position: 'right',
        },
      ],
    },
  },
};

```

## Document structure

### Required directory structure

```
your-docusaurus-site/
├── docs/                   # Documentation root
│   ├── intro.md           # Documentation files
│   └── advanced/
│       └── config.md
├── static/                 # Static assets directory
└── docusaurus.config.js    # Configuration file

```

### Frontmatter configuration

Your markdown files can include these frontmatter fields for enhanced search functionality:

```markdown
---
title: Document Title
description: A brief description that appears in search results
keywords: [search, docusaurus, plugin]
draft: false                # Exclude from search when true
last_update:               # Optional update tracking
  date: 2024-03-20
  author: John Doe
---

```

## Content processing

### Smart content indexing

The plugin processes your content with these features:

1. **Intelligent caching**
    - File-based caching system for faster builds
    - Automatic detection of content changes
    - Incremental rebuilding for modified files only
2. **Content normalization**
    - Consistent URL generation across platforms
    - Special handling for index files
    - Clean URL paths for improved SEO
3. **Automatic exclusions**
Content automatically excluded from search:
    - Root/welcome page (URL: '/')
    - Draft documents
    - Content in excluded folders (default: 'contributor-guide')
    - Files with `draft: true` in frontmatter

### Search index generation

The plugin creates two search index files:

- `/build/searchIndex.json`: Public search index
- `/static/searchIndex.json`: Development index

## User interface

### Search component features

The search interface provides:

- Expandable search input
- Real-time results dropdown
- Keyboard navigation support
- Result highlighting
- Last update information display
- Mobile-friendly design

### Search Implementation

Here's how the Smart Search Plugin appears in your Docusaurus navbar:

1. **Inactive state**
   
   ![Image showing the search bar in its inactive state](https://github.com/patriciamcphee/portfolio/blob/main/blog/images/search-icon-only.png?raw=true)

2. **Activated state with results**

   ![Image showing the expanded search bar when clicked](https://github.com/patriciamcphee/portfolio/blob/main/blog/images/search-results.png?raw=true)

The search functionality seamlessly integrates with your Docusaurus theme while maintaining the metadata-driven approach.

### Keyboard shortcuts

- `Enter`: Navigate to first result
- `Escape`: Close search dropdown
- `Tab`: Navigate through results
- `Arrow Up/Down`: Navigate results (coming soon)

### Styling customization

Override default styles by creating a custom CSS module with these classes:

```css
.searchContainer    /* Main container */
.searchWrapper     /* Input container */
.searchIcon        /* Search icon */
.searchInput       /* Search input */
.dropdownResults   /* Results dropdown */
.resultItem        /* Individual result */
.resultTitle      /* Result title */
.resultMeta       /* Update information */

```

## Technical details

### Project architecture

```
smart-search-plugin/
├── src/
│   ├── index.js           # Plugin core
│   └── theme/
│       ├── index.js       # Theme exports
│       ├── Layout.js      # Layout integration
│       ├── Root.js        # Root component
│       └── SearchBar/
│           ├── Search.js  # Search component
│           └── styles.module.css
└── lib/                   # Compiled output

```

### Dependencies

The plugin uses these key dependencies:

- `lunr`: Search implementation
- `antd`: UI components
- `gray-matter`: Frontmatter parsing
- `@ant-design/icons`: UI icons

### Browser support

- Modern browsers (Chrome, Firefox, Safari, Edge)
- IE11 not supported

## Contributing

We welcome contributions! Please follow these steps:

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/AmazingFeature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Add some AmazingFeature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/AmazingFeature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

## License

MIT

## Credits

Built with:

- [Docusaurus](https://docusaurus.io/)
- [Ant Design](https://ant.design/)
- [Lunr.js](https://lunrjs.com/)
